Documentation for OSS rules of play rating (#612)
SAP/fosstars-rating-core: docs/getting_oss_rules_of_play_rating.md

# Getting the OSS rules of play ratings

The page describes how a rules of play rating may be calculated for an open source project.

## Configuration

> Several of the rules need to configured as the detailed guidelines differ from project to project, for example which licenses may be allowed in your organization or which sections you want to enforce in the README file. Thus, in order to get proper OSS rules of play ratings, you need to provide some details. These details are usually passed to Fosstars via YAML configuration files for the respective data providers. Below you find the configurable data providers, information how to name the configuration files and the possible options in the respective configuration file. The section about the command-line tool further below explains how to pass these configuration files to Fosstars. The configuration that SAP uses for their OSS rules of play check run can be accessed in the [fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/tree/fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report) branch.

Reviewer: - Are there any mandatory iields in the configurations?
- Any special cases to be kept in check?

Author: Yep, for instance the expected license list is mandatory, others can also be omitted. But the details are explained in the respective sub-sections.

### Contributing Guidelines

> This data provider with the ID `ContributingGuidelineInfo` allows you to specify regular expression patterns with content that you expect to be in the contributing guidelines or that must not be in the contributing guidelines of the analyzed project. The option is called `requiredContentPatterns` and expects a list of one or multiple entries. If you enter multiple entries, the contribution guidelines must match all patterns for the rule to pass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This data provider `ContributingGuidelineInfo` allows you to specify 2 types of regular expression patterns 
- The content that you expect to be part of contributing guidelines
- The content that you expect must not be part of the contributing guidelines
The option is called `requiredContentPatterns` and expects a list of one or multiple entries. If you enter multiple entries, the contribution guidelines must comply with all the patterns for the rule to pass.
```
May be an example of the pattern?

### Licensing

> This data provider with the ID `LicenseInfo` allows you to specify which license(s) should be allowed in the analyzed project. This option is called `allowedLicenses` and expects a list of one or more SPDX license IDs. In addition you can check for terms that must not in the license (e.g. to avoid modifications) using regular expression patterns. The corresponding option is called `disallowedLicensePatterns`, accepts a list of patterns, but can also be left empty. Finally, you are also able to specify exceptions, i.e. which repositories shall not be checked with this data provider, for example because certain repositories are known to use other licenses, but have gone through an exception process. The option is called `repositoryExceptions` and can accept a list of full repository URLs, e.g. `https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core`, but can also be left empty if there are no exceptions.

Reviewer: The data provider `LicenseInfo`

Reviewer: There are few redundant lines like 
- `but can also be left empty`.
- Could we split this into steps or points. When we use Finally, it usually means there is few steps above or few options which should be followed.

Author: Yeah, also thought about bullet points, but for now I kept it like that as it suits a little better to the style of the rest. The "can also be left empty" is there to emphasize that it's an optional entry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The data provider `LicenseInfo` allows you to specify which license(s) should be allowed in the analyzed project.
This option is called `allowedLicenses` and expects a list of one or more SPDX license IDs.
In addition you can check for terms that must not in the license (e.g. to avoid modifications) using regular expression patterns.
The corresponding option is called `disallowedLicensePatterns`, and it accepts a list of patterns, but can also be left empty.
Finally, you are also able to specify exceptions, i.e. which repositories shall not be checked with this data provider, for example, because certain repositories are known to use other licenses, but have gone through an exception process.
The option is called `repositoryExceptions` and can accept a list of full repository URLs, e.g. `https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core`, but can also be left empty if there are no exceptions.
```

```
[+] Creating issues for findings on https://github.com/<organization>/<repository>
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-license_file-3] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] New issue: [rop-vulnerability_alerts-1] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-reuse_tool-2] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-security_policy-1] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-license_file-2] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-reuse_tool-1] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-reuse_tool-3] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-reuse_tool-4] Violation against OSS Rules of Play  
```

### Other options

Other command-line options are as well available for use with the OSS rules of play rating. Please refer to the [security rating documentation](getting_oss_security_rating.md) for more details.

## Fosstars OSS Rules of Play GitHub action

> SAP already uses the OSS Rules of Play rating in a [GitHub action](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/blob/master/.github/workflows/fosstars-rules-of-play.yml) and posts the results in a dedicated branch on [fosstars-rating-core](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/tree/fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report).

Reviewer: [`fosstars-rating-core`](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/tree/fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report)
- Lets have a common naming convention. In the top most section you use `fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report`
- Also lets have normal mention instead of an identifier syntax. For example: **Rules of Play report from Fosstars**
- I leave it up to you as how you see fit.
- It would be really nice if the point 2 is applied everywhere.

Author: The first identifier is simply the branch for the SAP report. From my perspective, the more relevant identifier here would be the command-line option `oss-rules-of-play` - that's how Artem called the rating at the first place. That's why I explained everything in the documentation accordingly. 
I'm not against a consistent renaming, but from my perspective also the focus on _open source_ rules of play makes slightly more sense than mentioning that the report comes from Fosstars. Thus, I'd rather keep it as it is right now.

# Getting the OSS rules of play ratings

The page describes how a rules of play rating may be calculated for an open source project.

## Configuration

Several of the rules need to configured as the detailed guidelines differ from project to project, for example which licenses may be allowed in your organization or which sections you want to enforce in the README file. Thus, in order to get proper OSS rules of play ratings, you need to provide some details. These details are usually passed to Fosstars via YAML configuration files for the respective data providers. Below you find the configurable data providers, information how to name the configuration files and the possible options in the respective configuration file. The section about the command-line tool further below explains how to pass these configuration files to Fosstars. The configuration that SAP uses for their OSS rules of play check run can be accessed in the [fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/tree/fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report) branch.

### Contributing Guidelines

> This data provider `ContributingGuidelineInfo` allows you to specify 2 types of regular expression patterns 
> - The content that you expect to be part of the contributing guidelines
> - The content that you expect must not be part of the contributing guidelines
> The option is called `requiredContentPatterns` and expects a list of one or multiple entries. If you enter multiple entries, the contribution guidelines must comply with all the patterns for the rule to pass.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The data provider `ContributingGuidelineInfo` allows you to specify 2 types of regular expression patterns 
- The content that you expect to be part of the contributing guidelines.
- The content that you expect must not be part of the contributing guidelines.
The option is called `requiredContentPatterns` and expects a list of one or multiple Regex. If you enter multiple entries, the contribution guidelines must comply with all the patterns for the rule to pass.
```

### Licensing
This data provider with the ID `LicenseInfo` allows you to specify which license(s) should be allowed in the analyzed project. This option is called `allowedLicenses` and expects a list of one or more SPDX license IDs. In addition you can check for terms that must not in the license (e.g. to avoid modifications) using regular expression patterns. The corresponding option is called `disallowedLicensePatterns`, accepts a list of patterns, but can also be left empty. Finally, you are also able to specify exceptions, i.e. which repositories shall not be checked with this data provider, for example because certain repositories are known to use other licenses, but have gone through an exception process. The option is called `repositoryExceptions` and can accept a list of full repository URLs, e.g. `https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core`, but can also be left empty if there are no exceptions.

### Readme

> This data provider with the ID `ReadmeInfo` allows you to specify which terms or patterns you expect to see in a README file. The corresponding option `requiredContentPatterns` expects a list of one or more regular expression patterns. If you enter multiple entries, the README file content must match all patterns for the rule to pass.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The data provider `ReadmeInfo` allows you to specify which terms or patterns you expect to see in a README file.
The corresponding option `requiredContentPatterns` expects a list of one or more regular expression patterns.
If you enter multiple entries, the README file content must match all patterns for the rule to pass.
```

## Rule IDs and Documentation URL

> In order to be able to identify a certain rule better in the final result report, e.g. for follow-up actions, Fosstars expects that all rules are configured with a customized rule ID. That configuration needs to be in a file called `OssRulesOfPlayRatingMarkdownFormatter.config.yaml` and should be placed in the current working directory. The relevant option is called `ruleIds` and expects a list of key/value pairs where the key is the customized rule ID and the value the descriptive name of the rule that is maintained in the [OssFeatures class]((https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/blob/master/src/main/java/com/sap/oss/phosphor/fosstars/model/feature/oss/OssFeatures.java)). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to be able to identify a certain rule better in the final result report, e.g. for follow-up actions, Fosstars expects that all rules are configured with a customized rule ID. That configuration needs to be in a file called `OssRulesOfPlayRatingMarkdownFormatter.config.yaml` and should be placed in the current working directory. The relevant option is called `ruleIds` and expects a list of key/value pairs where the key is the customized rule ID and the value the descriptive name of the rule that is maintained in the [OssFeatures class](../src/main/java/com/sap/oss/phosphor/fosstars/model/feature/oss/OssFeatures.java). 
```

Moreover, you should provide a documentation URL that explains your OSS rules of play configuration and the expected content of the checked repositories. The corresponding option is called `documentationUrl` and expects a single string pointing to the documentation web page.
The configuration that SAP uses for their OSS rules of play check run can be accessed in the [fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/blob/fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report/OssRulesOfPlayRatingMarkdownFormatter.config.yml) branch.

## Command-line tool for calculating OSS rules of play ratings

> The command-line tool to calculate OSS rules of play ratings is the same as the one that is [used to get security ratings](getting_oss_security_rating.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The command-line tool can be used to calculate OSS Rules of Play ratings.
```

[+]       Does it have a contributing guideline?.................Yes
[+]       Does it have a license file?...........................Yes
[+]       Does it have a security policy?........................Yes
[+]       Does it have a team with push privileges on GitHub?....Yes
[+]       Does it have an admin team on GitHub?..................Yes
[+]       Does it have enough admins on GitHub?..................Yes
[+]       Does it have enough teams on GitHub?...................Yes
[+]       Does it have unresolved vulnerability alerts?..........No
[+]       Does it use an allowed license?........................Yes
[+]       Does teams have enough members on GitHub?..............Yes
[+]       Does the contributing guideline have required text?....Yes
[+]       Does the license have disallowed content?..............No
[+]       If a project's README doesn't contain required info:...Yes
[+]       Is it compliant with REUSE rules?......................Yes
[+]       Is it registered in REUSE?.............................Yes
[+]   Explanation:..Found 1 recommendations
[+]
[+] Rating:     9.0  out of 10.0 -> PASSED_WITH_WARNING
[+] Confidence: Max (10.0 out of 10.0)
[+]
[+] Bye!
```

> The tool prints out the gathered data, the structure of the overall security score, used sub-scores,
> their weights and so on. This info may be useful if one would like to understand how the tool
> calculated the rating. In the end, the tool print a list of possible improvements in the project
> that would positively impact the rating.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The tool prints out the gathered data and a status for the project.
```

> If `--interactive` option is specified, the tool becomes a bit interactive,
> and may ask the user a couple of questions about the project.

Reviewer 2: This option is not really used by the OSS RoP rating.

```suggestion
```

### Creating GitHub issues for failed rules

> Exclusively for the OSS rules of play rating, Fosstars can create GitHub issues for failed rules directly in the affected repositories so the issues can be followed up by the repository owners. If you want to do that, add the command-line option `--create-issues`. Fosstars will inform you on the command-line about the issue creation process as well:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Exclusively for the OSS rules of play rating, Fosstars can create GitHub issues for failed rules directly in the affected repositories so the issues can be followed up by the repository owners. If you want to do that, add the command-line option `--create-issues` or enable `ISSUES` reporter in a config file passes through `--config` options.
Fosstars will inform you on the command-line about the issue creation process as well:
```

```
[+] Creating issues for findings on https://github.com/<organization>/<repository>
[+] New issue: [rop-license_file-3] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] New issue: [rop-vulnerability_alerts-1] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] New issue: [rop-reuse_tool-2] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] New issue: [rop-security_policy-1] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] New issue: [rop-license_file-2] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] New issue: [rop-reuse_tool-1] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] New issue: [rop-reuse_tool-3] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] New issue: [rop-reuse_tool-4] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Here is an example of a configuration file the scans projects in an organization on GitHub, creates a Markdown report and opens issues for violated rules:

cache: .fosstars/project_rating_cache.json
reports:
  - type: markdown # create a Markdown report in the current directory
    where: ./
  - type: ISSUES # open issues for violated rules
finder:
  organizations: # scan project in the SAP organization
    - name: SAP

```

```
[+] Creating issues for findings on https://github.com/<organization>/<repository>
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-license_file-3] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] New issue: [rop-vulnerability_alerts-1] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-reuse_tool-2] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-security_policy-1] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-license_file-2] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-reuse_tool-1] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-reuse_tool-3] Violation against OSS Rules of Play
[+] Issue already existing: [rop-reuse_tool-4] Violation against OSS Rules of Play  
```

### Other options

Other command-line options are as well available for use with the OSS rules of play rating. Please refer to the [security rating documentation](getting_oss_security_rating.md) for more details.

## Fosstars OSS Rules of Play GitHub action

> SAP already uses the OSS Rules of Play rating in a [GitHub action](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/blob/master/.github/workflows/fosstars-rules-of-play.yml) and posts the results in a dedicated branch on [fosstars-rating-core](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/tree/fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SAP already uses the OSS Rules of Play rating in a [GitHub action](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/blob/master/.github/workflows/fosstars-rules-of-play.yml) and posts the results to the branch [fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/tree/fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report).
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SAP already uses the OSS Rules of Play rating in a [GitHub action](../.github/workflows/fosstars-rules-of-play.yml) and posts the results in a dedicated branch on [fosstars-rating-core](https://github.com/SAP/fosstars-rating-core/tree/fosstars-oss-rules-of-play-sap-report).
```
